doc: add en_US/advanced/quic.md (#1210)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/advanced/quic.md

# QUIC transport support

QUIC is new general-purpose transport layer protocol for modern network.

## Introduction

> MQTT over QUIC protocol is an experiment feature in EMQX 5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT over QUIC protocol is an experimental feature in EMQX 5.0.
```

> You can play with MQTT over QUIC to verify how it could improve network connectivity between Client and EMQX comparing to TLS1.2 and TLS. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can evaluate MQTT over QUIC to verify how it could improve network connectivity between Client and EMQX comparing to TLS1.2 and TLS. 
```

Author: `TLS1.2 and TCP` I mean

> note, this is a feature of MQTT over QUIC not MQTT over HTTP/3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: this is a feature of MQTT over QUIC, not MQTT over HTTP/3.
```

## Features

- Support 0-RTT handshake

>   For low latency connection establishments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For low-latency connection establishments.
```

  
- Support Client Address Migration

  MQTT (over QUIC) client could change its network layer address or transport layer port without 
  any traffic disturbance. For example, in the scenario of NAT rebinding.
  
- Disabled traffic encryption

  MQTT (over QUIC) client could run unencrypted traffic after QUIC TLS1.3 handshake is done.
  
  see: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-banks-quic-disable-encryption
  
  note: this is a draft rfc spec.

## Implementation

### Client

> MQTT Client (QUIC client) initials a QUIC connection to EMQX (QUIC Server).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MQTT Client (QUIC client) initiates a QUIC connection to EMQX (QUIC Server).
```

After the conneciton handshake is done, MQTT Client then starts a bidirectional stream to EMQX.

Then all the MQTT Messages will be exchanged on this bidirectional stream.

> Either side of the stream closing the stream will lead to conneciton close just like TCP connection close.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Either side of the stream closing the stream will lead to conneciton close, just like TCP connection close.
```

Reference client:

https://github.com/emqx/emqtt

### For TLS 1.3 handshake

ALPN: MQTT

## Feature Enabling

> QUIC transport listener is diabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QUIC transport listener is disabled by default.
```

To experiment with QUIC transport, you need to 

1. Enable it via configuration 

```
listeners.quic.default {
  enabled = true
  bind = "0.0.0.0:14567"
  max_connections = 1024000
  keyfile = "{{ platform_etc_dir }}/certs/key.pem"
  certfile = "{{ platform_etc_dir }}/certs/cert.pem"
}
```

note, `{{ platform_etc_dir }}` is the emqx etc dir something like `/etc/emqx/certs`

> 1. restart EMQX.

Reviewer: I think it might become 1. in the rendered document, because the list items in markdown have to be indented.

> ## Future works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future work
```

> As it is now, EMQX has not utilized all the features that QUIC provides such as mutli streams, stream prioritization, flow controls and unreliable datagram...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of now, EMQX has not utilized all the features provided by QUIC, such as multi streams, stream prioritization, flow control and unreliable datagram...
```

> These features will be addressed in later releases and hopfuly becoming the OASIS standard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These features will be addressed in the later releases, and hopefully become an OASIS standard.
```

> # QUIC transport support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# MQTT over QUIC
```

> QUIC is a new general-purpose transport layer protocol for the modern networks.

Reviewer 2: Add link to rfc spec

## Introduction

MQTT over QUIC protocol is an experimental feature in EMQX 5.0.

You can evaluate MQTT over QUIC to verify how it could improve network connectivity between Client and EMQX compared to TLS1.2 and TCP. 

> Note, this is a feature of MQTT over QUIC, not MQTT over HTTP/3.

Reviewer 2: ::: note

Author: `note` does not work for me, only `tip` works, correct me if I am wrong.

## Features

- Support 0-RTT handshake

  For low-latency connection establishments.
  
- Support Client Address Migration

  MQTT (over QUIC) client could change its network layer address or transport layer port without 
  any traffic disturbance. For example, in the scenario of NAT rebinding.
  
- Disabled traffic encryption

  MQTT (over QUIC) client could run unencrypted traffic after QUIC TLS1.3 handshake is done.
  

>   see: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-banks-quic-disable-encryption

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  See: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-banks-quic-disable-encryption
```

  
  Note: this is a draft RFC spec.

## Implementation

### Client

MQTT Client (QUIC client) initiates a QUIC connection to EMQX (QUIC Server).

After the connection handshake is done, MQTT Client then starts a bidirectional stream to EMQX.

Then all the MQTT Messages will be exchanged on this bidirectional stream.

> Either side of the stream closing the stream will lead to a connection close, just like a TCP connection close.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If either side close the stream, the connection will also be closed, just like a TCP connection close.
```
?

Reference client:

https://github.com/emqx/emqtt

### For TLS 1.3 handshake

ALPN: MQTT

## Feature Enabling

QUIC transport listener is disabled by default.

To experiment with QUIC transport, you need to 

1. Enable it via configuration 

    ```
    listeners.quic.default {
    enabled = true
    bind = "0.0.0.0:14567"
    max_connections = 1024000

>     keyfile = "{{ platform_etc_dir }}/certs/key.pem"

Reviewer 2: Do not leave template unreplaced

Reviewer 2: Maybe `path/to/file/`

    certfile = "{{ platform_etc_dir }}/certs/cert.pem"
    }
    ```

>     note, `{{ platform_etc_dir }}` is the emqx etc dir something like `/etc/emqx/certs`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    note, `{{ platform_etc_dir }}` is the emqx etc dir something like `/etc/emqx`
```

1. restart EMQX.

## Future work

As of now, EMQX has not utilized all the features provided by QUIC, such as multi streams, stream prioritization, flow control and
unreliable datagram...

> These features will be addressed in the later releases, and hopefully, become an OASIS standard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These features will be addressed in the later releases and, hopefully, become an OASIS standard.
```

> Some hardcoded configurations in the stack is not ready for production use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some hardcoded configurations in the stack are not ready for production use.
```
